is Jonathan kutab he's an international
human rights lawyer he's also a
co-founder of the Palestinian human
rights groups alhak Jonathan what is
your assessment of the legal grounds of
South Africa's request as it
stands well uh I think the request is
very proper under international law uh
people seem to forget that it is the
obligation of Israel under international
law to provide food and basic services
to the people under its occupation not
only has Israel failed to meet that uh
obligation it has also obstructed and
prevented others from bringing food in
as part of a deliberate strategy to
starve the Palestinian people in fact it
was announced we will cut off food we
will cut off water we will not allow
fuel in we will not allow these things
in and then they started allowing it in
and a drip drip fashion we will allow a
few trucks here we'll allow a few trucks
there but we will also control not only
how much food comes in and what kind of
food comes in we also want to control
who does the
distribution and who safeguards these
convoys in the beginning it was the
regular police who would Safeguard these
convoys but then Israel started
targeting these police because they are
in uniform sometimes they are armed so
they consider them uh enemy combatants
members of Hamas and they shoot them
then after a while the convoys have no
protection to protect them uh once they
come in Israelis also determined that
they will not allow the food to come in
through the north there's 300,000 people
living in the northern half of the Gaza
Strip and Israel has control of of all
the borders and The Crossings there they
don't allow any food to come in from the
north instead it has to come from the
south after it is inspected by the
Israelis so by the time the food convoys
even the the few that are allowed by the
time they enter uh they have to feed the
people on the way so they're either
attacked or that they are looted or
people who are hungry simply grab the
food on the way the starvation now is
becoming part of Israel's policy they
want to stop the Jonathan it's clear
that Israel has not complied with the
previous provisional measures that the
court handed down and we also don't know
what was in the report that they were
due to submit to the icj over a week ago
many have described them as acting with
impunity what sort of recourse is
there well I think the question now is
about the court itself and about
international law in a real way what
South Africa did uh was not so much put
Israel on trial but put international
law itself on trial uh put the system of
international law and the icj itself
because like every other court in the
world the court doesn't have an army its
enforcement depends on the willingness
of the population and of the countries
of the world to obey its rules and when
Israel acts with total and utter
impunity and nobody is bringing them to
accountability and the United States of
course uses the veto to prevent the
security Council from enforcing
international law then international law
itself uh becomes uh under question you
say that this is is pressure on the
court now by all accounts Gaza is on the
brink of famine we know it's already
happening in parts of the strip the icj
case that we're talking about is
potentially going to take years so what
sort of a difference would more
provisional measures make if the court
does grant them to South Africa is this
then about ramping up diplomatic
pressure too on Israel's allies is is
that where the difference
lies yes a diplomatic and moral pressure
uh because if the court speaks and
speaks clearly then it's on the
countries of the world whether they are
willing to respect international law or
to allow Israel to act with impunity I
think it becomes more difficult for the
United States it becomes more difficult
for countries uh for example countries
which have cut off uh the aid to Ana
which is the only organization capable
of Distributing that food already the EU
has changed its position and Canada has
changed its position and hopefully the
other countries also will uh end the
suspension of Aid to hona Jonathan we've
been talking primarily here about the
icj case but as you say the constraints
on humanitarian Aid as people are
starving to death are also in clear
violation of humanitarian law is there
then perhaps another route another
simultaneous route to some kind of
accountability well the only the only
route that is available uh is the
different countries of the world uh at
the United Nations uh three times they
already tried and even a fourth time and
each time they were blocked by a us veto
already we are hearing some uh sounds
from the American Administration that
they want uh a ceasefire that they want
food to be allowed in unimpeded that
more food should be allowed in uh how
serious they are uh we will find out in
the next few days we will indeed and
we'll continue watching very closely
indeed Jonathan cutab there an
international human rights lawyer and
also a co-founder of the Palestinian
Human Rights group alhak thank you for
joining us on Al
jazer thank
you